The following are reviews of the Fantastic Four movie, which is out in cinemas already and the critics are saying it's good. Here are a bunch of reviews:

---

‘The Fantastic Four: First Steps’ review: New Marvel effort is competent at best
Despite the cartoon vibrancy of the film's aesthetic, Matt Shakman's ‘The Fantastic Four: First Steps’ feels surprisingly weary 

Writer Stan Lee and artist Jack Kirby premiered the Fantastic Four in a comic book in 1961, and the quartet soon came to be known as Marvel’s ‘first family’. They lived together as a family, tackling both interpersonal issues and intergalactic threats. The Fantastic Four: First Steps is a reboot with a brand-new cast that places this family of superheroes firmly within the MCU’s multiverse sprawl.

Set on Earth-828, First Steps recalls how four space travellers were transformed into beings with superpowers. It begins with a fateful space mission led by Dr. Reed Richards (Pedro Pascal), accompanied by astronauts Johnny Storm (Joseph Quinn), his sister Susan Storm (Vanessa Kirby), and Reed’s best friend Ben Grimm (Ebon Moss-Bachrach). When their ship passes through a cosmic storm, the event changes them forever. Reed Richards, aka Mr. Fantastic, is a no-nonsense genius with an elastic body. Sue Storm, aka Invisible Woman, can create force fields and turn invisible. Johnny Storm becomes the Human Torch, able to burst into flames and fly. Ben Grimm is physically transformed into The Thing, a super-strong, rock-skinned pilot and fighter—with sad eyes. Their trusted assistant is a robot named HERBIE.

Four years after the incident, the group is known and revered as the Fantastic Four—protectors of the planet. The team is more or less settled into their roles when things go wildly off the rails. The Silver Surfer (Julia Garner) arrives with a warning: Galactus, a cosmic force with an insatiable appetite, is headed toward Earth to devour the planet. The Fantastic Four embark on a discovery mission, but when they return, it’s not as heroes—instead, they bring back information that turns public opinion against them. It’s now up to the Fantastic Four to save both their family and the planet from Galactus.

Director Matt Shakman delivers a familiar setup and while Jack Kirby’s colourful cartoon vibrancy is felt in some of the film’s aesthetic, the overall tone feels surprisingly weary—particularly because Pedro Pascal himself looks worn out.

The cast does their best with the material. The actors bring a decent dynamic to the group, even if some roles feel undercooked. Reed is earnest but lacks the emotional depth the character demands. Susan is caught between duty and maternal instincts, though Vanessa Kirby appears uncomfortable handling a baby. Johnny is given the most interesting arc, and Quinn injects some much-needed energy into the group. Ben provides the emotional core, occasionally grappling with his monstrous form. The team chemistry works in moments, but there is barely enough breathing room for them to feel like a real family. A few endearing moments do land—Reed baby-proofing the apartment in preparation for Franklin’s birth, and Ben attempting to connect with a schoolteacher are notable highlights.

Plot-wise, the film hits all the expected beats: discovery, conflict, a third-act citywide disaster, all barreling toward the end-credits scene that teases the next MCU tie-in. The Fantastic Four: First Steps is competent at best—a reboot with cosmic ambition that barely attains lift-off.

---

Fantastic Four: First Steps made a cool $218 million globally this weekend—a happy haul for a film that means a great deal to Marvel. After disappointing returns for the lifeless Captain America: Brave New World and the charming but underwhelming Thunderbolts* earlier this year, the studio was staring down what had once been unthinkable: the end of its empire. If Fantastic Four failed, that would surely spell bad things for the upcoming mega-movie Avengers: Doomsday, which began shooting this spring.

So Marvel is, no doubt, breathing a slight sigh of relief now that early audiences have connected with the Fantastic Four—undaunted by crummy past attempts to put the characters onscreen—and are ostensibly interested in the continuation of the Marvel saga. How the film holds over the next few weeks will probably be the more telling indicator, though; if all the diehards got their kicks out this weekend, there will be a precipitous and discouraging drop in receipts.

A dark part of me almost welcomes that potential future. Even vaguely rooting for a movie to fail is a reckless thing to do in these days of fading industry; we’re talking about thousands of jobs here, done by people who have little say over the creative decisions at the top, not to mention the tastes of moviegoers. I don’t actually want any new movie to stumble. (Except maybe one.) Yet a failure could be valuable for Marvel, could help the studio learn a lesson so that the inevitable superhero movies to come might, at least, be better.

It wouldn’t be hard to improve upon Fantastic Four, an occasionally stylish but otherwise totally boilerplate superhero movie. At this uncertain point in MCU history, it’s a little shocking that the studio was comfortable delivering such a bland and perfunctory film—especially when it’s arriving at a crucial inflection point for both Marvel and the wider business.

But bland Fantastic Four is, playing as an undercooked sequel to a movie that never was. It’s hard to care about these characters, and even harder to root for them when they make a pretty selfish choice about the future of humanity. Little of its tepid humor lands, and the winsome detail of the film’s opening minutes quickly falls away so that the rude mechanics of plot can be dealt with. It’s yet another middling entry in the post-Endgame tradition, a film that doesn’t launch the franchise headlong at the future so much as it glumly drags us toward it.

It certainly doesn’t help that the studio across town, the long-beleaguered (and long-be-Justice Leaguered) DC, recently had a financial and creative success with Superman, a true reset of the house style. For once in its unending war, DC has pulled ahead of Marvel—with a former Marvel guy, James Gunn, at the helm.

Had Fantastic Four really belly flopped, it might have forced more studio-wide (even Disney-wide) thinking about the future of the endeavor. Instead, Fantastic Four probably did just well enough to convince the powers that be that things are chugging along okay, that only minor tweaks need to be made. (Or no tweaks, even!)

But I think there’s far more to be done than mere alterations. Creative integrity may not be the highest priority on executives’ lists, but maybe there’s still some interest in making the product genuinely good (as many Marvel movies once were). Enough that someone over there will see the dwindling acclaim and slumping (if still profitable) box office, and eventually pull the emergency brake to force a major shake-up.

One idea? If DC is suddenly beating Marvel at the whole whimsical-meets-arch-meets-sweetly-sentimental thing that the latter used to be so good at, then Marvel could swing back to the age of the gritty superhero, which DC errantly prolonged for years. Marvel has gone dark and somber before—think of the closing minutes of Infinity War, or the beginning ones of Endgame—but the studio has never sustained that mood for an entire film, let alone a series of films.

Maybe the X-Men, a ragtag band who have been on film in various iterations many times already this century, would be fitting subjects for such an experiment. Sure, the ersatz horror movie The New Mutants didn’t work, but that movie was made before Disney had full control of these characters. We already know some old X-Men are slated to be part of Doomsday, so the company would have to figure out whether to fold those actors and characters into a reboot or start completely anew. But that can all be reasoned out. The key thing is that the X-Men have always been a little edgy and in their heads, giving Disney a sturdy foundation to develop upon and tinker with.

Or maybe the studio could take the heaps of money it’s made from the MCU over the last 17 years and spend it on stand-alone films about entirely different things, an attempt at a great rebuilding of Hollywood tradition. You know: middle-budget but commercial movies with compelling movie stars that tell stories we haven’t seen before. Like what used to exist outside the realm of independent cinema. But that’s perhaps too fantastical; it’s probably wiser to stick with the flying people and their grand battles with space monsters. Maybe next time, just add a dog.

---

Marvel’s Fantastic Four Takes Their Memorable First Steps Inside the MCU
The two best comic book films of 2025 — Superman and The Fantastic Four: First Steps — are stripped-down tales that focus on relationships, the power of diversity, family (both genetic and found), and, most important of all, hope. They are built around an idea that, while great power does require great responsibility, it also demands selflessness, compassion, and empathy. All life matters, and no one is dispensable. I find this interesting.

While I prefer the former to the latter, it goes without saying that Marvel’s fourth attempt (coincidence?) to bring their “First Family” to life on the big screen is by far their most successful. Director Matt Shakman, the man behind the Disney+ television series WandaVision, has done a lovely job breathing life into the retro-futuristic 1960s world of Reed Richards (Pedro Pascal), his wife Sue Storm (Vanessa Kirby), her brother Johnny (Joseph Quinn), and their best friend Ben “The Thing” Grimm (Ebon Moss-Bachrach). It’s hard not to walk out of the theater without a happy smile firmly planted on your face.

It helps that all four actors work splendidly together. There is clear affection between them, and their overall chemistry is intoxicating. The quartet’s interpersonal dynamics are all authentically lived-in right from the start. This allows the building emotional maelstrom they’ll be forced to face to become all the more affecting.

Kirby is especially strong. Her work during a stirring interstellar escape sequence and in latter scenes where Sue internally wrestles with the truth that her brainiac husband has been logically pondering the horrifyingly unthinkable is spellbinding. It’s a superlative performance, arguably one of the best the MCU has ever had the good fortune to showcase.

However, events do become jumbled as they progress toward their action-heavy conclusion. Five different writers are credited with the screenplay and the original story, and maybe this is why things do come off as somewhat thematically discombobulated. Or, it could be that the producers applied their own heavy hand behind the scenes, cutting certain moments between characters that might have allowed the material to sing with additional authority. I don’t pretend to know the answer, but that doesn’t mean I still couldn’t shake the feeling that there were way too many cooks working in this particular kitchen, and that meant I didn’t find this comic book meal entirely filling.

But enough so I can still say I had a wonderful time watching this iteration of The Fantastic Four work together to fight for humanity’s survival. They’re up against Galactus (Ralph Ineson), a massive celestial being who literally consumes planets to sate a never-ending hunger. His arrival on Earth (an Earth from an alternate dimension to the one all of the main characters of the current MCU inhabit) is heralded by an elegantly ethereal Silver Surfer known as Shalla-Bal (Julia Garner). It is through their interactions with her that Reed, Sue, Johnny, and Ben will be able to initially stand face-to-face with Galactus to make the case for their planet’s continued survival.

And what does he want to leave the Earth alone? Galactus is after Reed and Sue’s newborn son, Franklin. If they give him their child, he will spare their plane. But this is not a bargain they can make. After a near-death escape from the Silver Surfer, the Fantastic Four return to Earth and let the rest of humanity know about their initial failure to stop the apocalypse-level threat coming their way.

Shakman utilizes the late 1960s setting perfectly. He has crafted a Gene Roddenberry-like playground where humanity has (mostly) come together as one, dismantled their militaries, and where nations work together for the greater good of all peoples around the globe. He and his talented technical team have taken concepts and ideas from the source material created by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby and breathed instantaneous cinematic life into them. The ideas pop off the screen every bit as much as the visuals do, and that makes this alternate universe Earth a wonderful place to spend almost two hours learning about.

Special attention must be paid to the production design crafted by Kasra Farahani (Loki), the costumes conceived by the great Alexandra Byrne (Emma., Elizabeth), and the crackerjack score composed by veteran Michael Giacchino (Up, The Batman). It’s astonishing work. Everything they’ve accomplished adds to the overall aesthetic with masterful aplomb, and I can’t imagine I’d have enjoyed this adventure nearly as much as I did without their stellar contributions.

I could have done without the first post-credit scene (which is becoming par for the course for most of these MCU entries at this point; they tend to annoy me), and while I know every one of these is developed to set up what happens next, this is an where the film would be better off had Marvel left it entirely self-contained. There are also weird story beats that did not connect with me, especially that all-important one of the Earth’s reaction to Reed’s honesty that he would not sacrifice Franklin to save the planet. It’s discarded almost as soon as it’s brought up, and the way it’s resolved is so tidy and so clean that only Kirby’s stupendously raw performance kept it from feeling unintentionally laughable as far as I was concerned.

Even so, much like Superman, it is that cathartic sensation of all-encompassing hope in the face of unimaginable evil that allowed The Fantastic Four: First Steps to resonate with me. This means Marvel’s First Family starts their sojourn inside the MCU with magnetic grandeur, and I’m excited to see where the quartet travels next.

---

'The Fantastic Four: First Steps' plus a rom-com turned sideways and more in theaters

In a primary-colored, retro-futurist version of 1961 Manhattan, elastic Mister Fantastic (Pedro Pascal) and his wife Sue, aka Invisible Woman (Vanessa Kirby) are living in a sort of dysfunctional family with Sue's brother, Human Torch (Joseph Quinn), and their buddy The Thing (Ebon Moss-Bachrach). A baby's on the way, but their celebratory mood is cut short by the arrival of a threatening glow in the heavens and a Silver Surfer who looks like a classy hood ornament, bearing a message: "Your world will be consumed by the Devourer … Galactus." Always something, yes? It occurs to the Four that maybe they should go talk to this Galactus fellow before he starts his devouring, and soon they're sitting atop a rocket that director Matt Shakman and his team have crafted to look the way I thought rockets would look back before I saw real rockets — sleek, slender, elegant, with fins — which is to say, a 3D comic-book rocket. Gotta say, as it was transporting them, I was feeling a little transported myself — to a time that I remember as simpler, much like the sentiments this cheerfully heroic gang expresses on the way to the usual cosmic showdowns.

There are loads of in-jokes, including having the original cast from an unreleased 1994 Roger Corman-produced Fantastic Four show up as extras. It's brisk, brightly comic, and most of all, sincere and earnest (this year's superhero mode), a combo that works just as well here as it does for Superman in the DC Universe. That's a good thing, because there's a lot riding on whether audiences like The Fantastic Four: First Steps, since it's kicking off the Marvel Cinematic Universe's "Phase Six" and setting up years of storylines. Happily, unlike most recent superhero movies, you don't have to know any backstories at all to understand it. You can take your first steps with the team.

---

The new 'Fantastic Four' starts Marvel's next phase off on the right (gigantic) foot

It is a truth insufficiently acknowledged that any superhero film aiming for groundedness, grittiness or — shudder — real-world relevance fails in the attempt. In fact, any and all efforts to bridge the distance between the superhero world and ours simply serves to shine a searchlight into the yawning chasm that stretches between us.

Groundedness has always been the wrong target, a mug's game, whether your main character spends the film leaping tall buildings in a single bound, web-slinging between them, or brooding in their shadows dressed like a cross between a nocturnal mammal and a goth trapeze artist.

No, it's a willing suspension of disbelief that's the true aim. Happily, The Fantastic Four: First Steps uses bright, retina-sizzling, retro-futurist visuals, waste-no-time plotting and fully committed performances to put disbelief into a deep, dreamless cryosleep for the whole of its under-two-hour(!) runtime. It leaves groundedness sulking glumly on the ground where it belongs to embrace the soaring appeal of superhero cinema with a commitment to exactly the kind of cosmic-level escapism we desperately need right now, as the real world has never proven more escape-worthy.

Retro-future, perfect
Welcome, friends, to July 2025, the Summer of the Sunny Superhero. A few weeks back, James Gunn's Superman took a power-washer to the DC Universe, dissolving the thick layers of brown grime and gray gunk that had accreted over the years, to reveal the bold primary colors its heroes were originally painted in.

Something similar is going on in The Fantastic Four: First Steps, as that subtitle implies. The world of this film isn't the familiar corner of the Marvel Cinematic Universe where heroes trade punched-up quips about pop-culture properties while squabbling with each other and fighting their inner demons. (Earlier this year, Thunderbolts* closed the previous chapter of the MCU with a villain so wincingly emo he could manage a Hot Topic; dude literally sent heroes into shame-spirals by trapping them inside their guiltiest memories.)

The Earth of this film is an alternate one on which the Space Age never ended. It's a bright, sun-dazzled, '60s-styled, mid-century modern world of flying cars and household robots and pillbox hats and trilbys and car-fins. Much of the film takes place in and around a disquietingly tidy Manhattan, where skyscrapers swoop and soar around a Times Square that boasts giant cathode-ray televisions instead of billboards.

Which is to say: The vibe, and most especially the production design, is lifted straight out of 1960s Fantastic Four comics — an opening montage references several of the team's early adventures, bringing the cover of Fantastic Four #1 to glorious, cheesy life, while a breathless newscaster extolls the kind of victories that only happen in Silver Age comics ("They defeated the Red Ghost and his Super-Apes!").

No apologies
And that's what's truly new and bracingly refreshing, here — this enthusiastic doubling down on the comic book source material in all its whimsical, cheery, wide-eyed wonder. Previous Fantastic Four films (like most superhero cinema of the past decade) felt the need to hold the goofier, more childlike elements of the comics at a distance in pursuit of a grounded quality that would, in their minds, appeal to non-comics-reading adults.

But what if — both this movie and Superman ask — such performative nose-holding was always a dumb idea? What if a film could faithfully capture and reproduce the sense of joy and promise and the pure feats of imagination that the comics have always afforded readers, instead of apologizing for them and laboring to come up with comics-adjacent stories and characters that were more cool, more relevant, more believable?

What if — by way of example — a film were to introduce a cosmic villain like Galactus, Devourer of Worlds, who in the comics is a fearsome giant in a purple knee-length skirt and an utterly ridiculous tunic-fork helmet, and actually commit to the damn bit, already? Makers of 2007's Fantastic Four: Rise of the Silver Surfer famously chickened out. Oh, they were only too happy to establish Galactus as a global threat to raise that film's stakes, but ended up depicting him as a kind of (checks notes) … irritable … space … (checks notes again) … cloud?

In The Fantastic Four: First Steps, O.G. Galactus is well and truly in the house, replete with tuning-fork headgear (he's dialed back the iconic purple for an outfit made of charcoal-colored machine parts, but the skirt still hits him at exactly the right place on the thigh). And he looks, well … fantastic, whether sitting on his massive throne upbraiding the staff (his herald on a flying surfboard, played by an electroplated Julia Garner), snarling at humanity in actor Ralph Ineson's rumbling basso-profundo ("Clever insects!"), or gallumphing slowly but determinedly through lower Manhattan, crushing empty city buses under his mammoth boots, like the most noble, haughty, nattily dressed kaiju you've ever seen. Imagine if Godzilla spoke the Queen's English and had a stick up his butt. That.

Four on the floor 
In the face of such implacable evil, we have our titular super-team, whose origin story, thankfully, gets efficiently hand-waved away in that aforementioned opening montage. There's Reed Richards (Pedro Pascal), a brilliant scientist with a rubberized body. There's his wife Sue (Vanessa Kirby), who can make herself invisible and cast force fields. There's Sue's hotheaded brother Johnny (Joseph Quinn), who can turn into flame and fly. And there's Ben (Ebon Moss-Bachrach), a humanoid lump of super-strong orange rock. (The team's individual super-powered codenames — Mister Fantastic, The Invisible Girl, The Human Torch and The Thing — never occur in the film's dialogue, but are featured prominently in the glowing in-film press coverage of the heroes, which seems fitting.)

The film chooses to render our doughty heroes' super-costumes as cerulean-blue rollneck sweaters, which is a puzzling choice both aesthetically and practically: knitwear seems literally ill-fitted to derring-do. Defending the Earth is a workout; who among us could save the world when they're both itchy and sweaty? Who would want to?

This is still a Hollywood movie, so dogged attempts are dutifully made to give all four main characters an emotional arc, with mixed results. Johnny gets to prove that he's more than just a blond himbo by bringing some linguistic skills to bear on the dilemma facing the world. Gruff Ben gets to display his softer side by haltingly flirting with a Hebrew-school teacher (a blink-and-you'll-miss-her Natasha Lyonne). Sue becomes a mother over the course of the film, and just when that threatens to define her character in a disappointingly regressive way, she gets to make an all-important argument about What Family Means(™) that, while perfectly effective within the reality of the film, would never in a million years convince absolutely anyone at all on this, our darker, fallen, less-evolved world. (See above, in re: Chasm, yawing and: Groundedness, irrelevancy of).

But this is Pedro Pascal's movie, as he manages to plumb layers within the character of our square-jawed, heroic team leader Reed Richards that previous actors haven't. His Reed is at once a hero determined to protect humanity, and a nerd whose brain churns ceaselessly through worst-case scenarios to help him do it. He's an optimistic catastrophist, and it's that complicated inner struggle that defines the film.

Well, that, plus the glorious visuals, which represent the key ingredient, the z-axis, to this film's appeal. They make this a movie to be freeze-framed and pored over. They so effectively construct a world outside and wholly distinct from our own that they single-handedly guarantee the film an extended shelf life.

Despite the fact that The Fantastic Four: First Steps shares so much aesthetic DNA with Superman, Gunn's film takes place in a recognizably contemporary timeframe. In 10 or 20 years, its look and feel (hairstyles, fashion, technology) will distance audiences from its events, its immediacy. It will become a milestone, a relic of its time.

The Fantastic Four: First Steps does an end-run around that process with a production design that ensconces it firmly outside of time. It's already a distant world — intentionally so — and it will remain exactly that forever. Decades from now, it will still invite us to escape into it, to delight in its larger-than-life characters, its intergalactic battles and its heart-stirring moments of heroism — and, yes, in its benign, winning, blessed goofiness.

---

The Fantastic Four: First Steps grinds Marvel's First Family into the MCU machinery
Being the best Fantastic Four movie isn't quite good enough to escape the MCU doldrums.

A summer without superhero movies may still be years or decades away, but at least Hollywood seems willing to achieve Origin Story Zero. Despite a title that tips a cap to the characters’ Marvel Cinematic Universe debut, The Fantastic Four: First Steps joins this season’s Superman and Thunderbolts as superhero stories that plop audiences in medias res, at least compared to the Fantastic Four retellings of decades’ past. A title card lets the nerds know that this is all taking place on Earth-828, explaining the 1960s-ish retro-futuristic style and lack of any other visible MCU superheroes. Then off we go into an Easter eggy (but not off-puttingly so) newsreel-style montage chronicling the many adventures of stretchy scientist Reed Richards (Pedro Pascal), his sometimes-invisible wife Sue Storm (Vanessa Kirby), her fiery brother Johnny (Joseph Quinn), and their rock-monster family friend Ben Grimm (Ebon Moss-Bachrach), less charitably known as The Thing.

Generally, their superhero monikers don’t get much play in this story, which is so family-focused that it becomes almost weirdly insular, with few other characters to speak of—and even fewer that aren’t computer-generated. Besides The Thing, a wondrously seamless visual-effects creation, and the similarly well-rendered robot assistant H.E.R.B.I.E. (Matthew Wood), the heroes encounter a shiny alien being known as the Silver Surfer (Julia Garner), who arrives on Earth to herald the arrival of Galactus (Ralph Ineson), a vast, godlike, world-devouring creature. Though the Surfer  evinces some oblique cosmic decency beneath her shiny metallic exterior, Galactus appears to be an unstoppable, unknowable force, and brainiac Reed must figure out how to protect his family and the rest of the Earth from this unimaginably massive threat. It must be said that some of the plans he comes up with do not sound like the work of a bona fide genius.

They seem, in fact, like remnants of smaller, dumber movies that preceded this one, heralding oblivion. Specifically, despite a trip to space and through some time-dilating portals, on paper First Steps more or less remakes 2007’s Fantastic Four: Rise Of The Silver Surfer. That low-rent sequel expends no small amount of its 87 minutes sans credits on a ghastly Mister Fantastic dance sequence and a scene where the world’s most famous superheroes irritate passengers on a commercial airline. No such antics animate First Steps, and while the new movie is better than the two-and-done Tim Story-directed sorta-series by a factor that may reach the triple digits, perhaps a smidge more whimsy might have done some good. An odd moroseness takes over the movie in its back half, mostly due to a stakes-raising moral dilemma. Given, surprisingly, how much the advertising materials draw footage from the first half-hour, this turn probably qualifies as a spoiler. Suffice to say that there’s a thoughtful, almost Star Trek-like moral question that the movie ultimately feels unequipped to take seriously—though that doesn’t stop director Matt Shakman and four credited screenwriters from trying, exacerbating Marvel’s ongoing tension between their grown-up aspirations and their four-quadrant instincts (or possibly vice versa).

Any break from the lightweight Marvel punch-up style is a welcome one, yet The Fantastic Four: First Steps still finds room for plenty of bad dialogue. The freedom once afforded actors as eclectic as the entire cast of Iron Man 2 is long gone, leaving this central quartet to play things respectably, honorably, and more than a little muted, with occasional outbreaks of Downey Lite yammering where certain words get repeated (“plan” is one here) like the characters are vamping on a third-tier single-camera sitcom. The endless possibilities of a retro-futuristic alternate universe are utilized, in part, to imagine that the laziness of writing in fist-bumps or dully contemporary phrasings and affectations can escape anachronism status on a technicality. The early scene where Sue announces her pregnancy is a deadly object lesson in forced multiple-draft chumminess, inspiring wistful thoughts of how Pascal was apparently warned off of doing a Mid-Atlantic accent. Stylish costumes are one thing; stylized acting is apparently quite another. For much of the film, the whole cast politely avoids stepping on each other’s toes.

---

The Fantastic Four Movie Is … Not
Marvel’s latest has a great cast and a fresh look, but it’s missing something crucial.

The timing of the release of The Fantastic Four: First Steps, only two weekends after James Gunn’s Superman opened in theaters to warm critical acclaim and, by 2025 standards, boffo box office, will probably work out in the former’s favor. This third attempt to reboot the 1960s comic-book franchise seems likely to draft off the energy, and the renewed interest in superheroic exploits, generated by DC’s fresh take on its most storied cape-wearer. Unlike the wan pair of Fantastic Four films made in 2005 and 2007 (starring a pre–Captain America Chris Evans as the incendiary Johnny Storm), respectively, or the truly dire 2015 reboot that stranded a lost-looking Michael B. Jordan on the appropriately named Planet Zero, this latest iteration of the super-quartet might actually stick around long enough to justify the movie’s hopeful subtitle.


The timing of the release of The Fantastic Four: First Steps, only two weekends after James Gunn’s Superman opened in theaters to warm critical acclaim and, by 2025 standards, boffo box office, will probably work out in the former’s favor. This third attempt to reboot the 1960s comic-book franchise seems likely to draft off the energy, and the renewed interest in superheroic exploits, generated by DC’s fresh take on its most storied cape-wearer. Unlike the wan pair of Fantastic Four films made in 2005 and 2007 (starring a pre–Captain America Chris Evans as the incendiary Johnny Storm), respectively, or the truly dire 2015 reboot that stranded a lost-looking Michael B. Jordan on the appropriately named Planet Zero, this latest iteration of the super-quartet might actually stick around long enough to justify the movie’s hopeful subtitle.

That’s good news for Marvel, which, 37 movies into the cinematic universe it’s been building for the past decade and a half, has been struggling to draw the audiences it did in its prime Avengers era. Is it good news for viewers, for the future of the film medium, or for the four overqualified actors who inhabit the roles of Mister Fantastic (Pedro Pascal), Sue Storm (Vanessa Kirby), the Human Torch (Joseph Quinn), and the Thing (Ebon Moss-Bachrach)? I’m not so sure. Even as this Fantastic Four benefits from the goodwill trailing in Superman’s wake, it also can’t help but invite comparisons between that picture’s crisp wit and its own relative … the kindest word I can think of is limpness, evoking the late scene in which Mister Fantastic’s elastic limbs get stretched out way too far. Both movies do share some positive qualities: a modest two-hour running time, a retro sensibility (manifested in Superman by details like the omnipresence of physical newspapers, and here by a period setting in an alternate version of the early 1960s), and a commitment to sincere emotional connection that’s a welcome break from the snark and gloom of the typical 2010s superhero. But though The Fantastic Four: First Steps has all the elements in place to make it the keystone of a new Marvel era, the script (by Josh Friedman, Jeff Kaplan, Eric Pearson, and Ian Springer) never loses a vague, hand-waving quality that leaves its central characters as indistinctly drawn as the moral conflict they ultimately face.

First Steps is directed by television veteran Matt Shakman, best known for directing all nine episodes of WandaVision—a series that, like this movie, imagined its superpowered protagonists’ lives in a domestic setting from which the action and the drama sprang. An opening montage, framed as a TV news clip, briskly establishes the Fab Four’s backstory: They were astronauts on a space mission that encountered a cosmic anomaly, leaving them each with a different set of powers. Reed Richards, aka Mister Fantastic, is a scientific genius with the rubbery body of a vintage Stretch Armstrong doll. His wife, Sue Storm, can create force fields and make herself invisible. Sue’s brother Johnny, an excitable type always spoiling for a fight, can set himself aflame at will. And Ben Grimm, alone among the four, has been permanently transformed into a not-quite-human shape; he’s basically a walking pile of rocks, with a correspondingly mighty pair of fists that he, unlike the hotheaded Johnny, is loath to use except in the most extreme circumstances.

The movie’s opening act finds the foursome cohabiting in their midcentury-modern-styled New York high-rise, decorated in Jetsons style with plenty of bubble-shaped turntables, Saarinen tulip chairs, and primary-colored accents. In this nifty abode, the gentle Ben prepares lovingly made dinners (prompting fans of Moss-Bachrach’s work on The Bear to murmur “yes, chef”) while Reed fiddles with his experiments in teleportation. When Sue announces that she’s pregnant, the whole super-family is thrilled, but their joy is soon cut short by the arrival of a naked metal lady (Julia Garner) on a flying surfboard. This Silver Surfer is an envoy from outer space, sent to announce that her boss, a giant space god named Galactus (Ralph Ineson), will soon be arriving to consume the entire planet. (Why exactly the villain feels the need to warn the denizens of Earth-828, as this alternate world is known, of their impending doom remains one of several key plot holes.)

A series of battles with the exceedingly dull Galactus—a character whose design and motivation can be summed up by the question “What if a guy was really big and hungry?”—ensues, first in space and later right at the Fantastics’ doorstep. On one early space mission, Sue goes into labor as our heroes are attempting to escape the peckish behemoth at warp speed. It’s a birth sequence that’s clearly written by four men, one that sanitizes the process so thoroughly that it wastes the chance to imagine what might happen to quarts of bodily fluid, never mind a placenta, in zero-gravity conditions. The resulting baby, a boy named Franklin, then becomes the focus of the story, as the giant determines that the child’s incipient superpowers will make him the only object in the universe capable of satisfying his gnawing hunger once and for all.

Galactus’ insatiable desire to consume the wee Franklin sets up a moral quandary for the Four: If they give up their beloved baby, the world will be spared from destruction. This kind of “trolley problem” dilemma has made for some memorable moments in previous superhero blockbusters: The scene in The Dark Knight where the Joker rigs two boats with explosives and gives each the option to destroy the other, for example, forces the characters and the audience to debate the morality of weighing the relative value of human lives. But The Fantastic Four forecloses any such debate by asserting, almost as soon as the question is raised, that both baby and world must be saved at all costs. In a would-be-inspiring speech to the angry crowd gathered outside the Four’s high-rise, Sue Storm, baby in arms, exhorts them to think of the whole world as one big family. The sentimentality of this scene is dispiriting, in that it reduces Kirby’s character to the sole trait of devotion to her child—not that one would expect a new mother to be willing to sacrifice her baby, but a superhero worth engaging with should at least struggle to reconcile her own family’s needs with the continued existence of the community at large.

The central foursome’s attempts at solving the Galactus-wants-our-baby problem, which I won’t detail for fear of spoiling, defy even the zaniest comic-book-movie logic; they’re the equivalent of that South Park meme where the intermediate step in an outlandish plan is represented by two question marks. The obligatory big final battle takes place in a city whose population has been evacuated to the underground kingdom of Subterranea (lorded over by a scene-stealing Paul Walter Hauser as Mole Man). The Fantastic Four’s plan to stop the villain may be weak, but their will and their superpowers—bendy limbs! Rocky fists! Force-y fields! Flaming … selves!—are indomitable, and in the end they live to fight another day. That day will next come in December 2026, when the Four are set to appear in Avengers: Doomsday, an all-star Marvel extravaganza in which a pack of do-gooders, including the new Avengers and the X-Men, will team up to fight none other than Robert Downey Jr., now playing not Tony Stark but the bad guy Dr. Doom. In the 17 years since the release of Iron Man, the hero has become a villain as the ever-self-regenerating MCU eats its own tail, Ouroboros style. At least it’s not eating a baby.

---

The Fantastic Four: First Steps review – hard not to wish for more commitment
Hesitance to commit to pulpy retrofuturism undermines one of the better MCU entries.

In 1968’s ​‘Fantastic Four Annual #6’, Reed Richards and Sue Storm await the birth of their first child, Franklin, but the issue takes Reed away from the hospital on a desperate trip across dimensions to rescue his wife and child from a complicated birth. Stan Lee and Jack Kirby lay out an exciting and visually dazzling adventure outside of space and time with the most human stakes possible: a man moving heaven and earth for the love of his family. 

The Fantastic Four: First Steps similarly foregrounds approaching parenthood against a background of cosmic wonder, and runs with it in a loose adaptation of Lee & Kirby’s Galactus Trilogy – first touched on Tim Story’s (awful) 2007 sequel Rise of the Silver Surfer. Shakman’s effort compresses the Four’s origin story into a TV documentary, recapping the story of four brave astronauts who were forever changed by cosmic rays, then became celebrities and ambassadors as well as scientists and superheroes. A quick and snappy montage through battles with classic foes brushes aside the Saturday Morning Cartoon villains for one more insurmountable: Galactus, a gigantic being who has to feed on planets to satisfy his insatiable hunger. To its credit, even amidst this cosmic scale, family is at the forefront of The Fantastic Four: First Steps, from its understated opening to the film’s MacGuffin being the arrival of Reed and Sue’s firstborn.

Not to mention this it’s the first Marvel film in a while that seems to actually strive for an individual visual identity. Particularly at home in the Baxter Building, the retrofuturistic production design is an easy highlight. It’s perhaps more Jetsons than Jack Kirby, full of beautiful analogue gizmos set amidst bold mid-century décor; the robot housekeeper H.E.R.B.I.E. with his tape deck face is one example of space age imagination. 

Even the costume designs feel like a refreshing alternative to what’s become the norm: instead of leathery militaristic getup, the Four dress in what looks like the inner layer of an astronaut suit — a visual reminder that these are explorers and even ambassadors, not super cops. Just as the production design begins to lift First Steps out of Marvel Studios anonymity, Michael Giacchino’s score also feels full of character – appropriately grandiose in its choral refrain, lifting the action up with it.

But as pretty as this design looks and as good as the score sounds, Shakman’s direction at times seems like it’s shying away from the pulpy sci-fi style which it apparently wants to embody. It’s hard not to think about Down With Love director Peyton Reed, who had suggested a retro take in a now decades-old pitch for a Fantastic Four adaptation. (His Ant-Man films felt like a layup for an eventual crack at this, too). Down With Love crackled with life in every aspect, an emulation of Rock Hudson flicks which both fully embraced the tone of its inspirations, leaning into whimsical visual tricks and playful banter characteristic of the time. First Steps by comparison feels like it’s missing that extra step: while the world The Fantastic Four inhabit is bright and tactile, the camerawork which captures it is decidedly less adventurous, the performances within are muted.

Classically weird and colourful characters like Mole Man are rendered with disappointing normalcy (he’s just a guy in a suit and tie!), even if Paul Walter Hauser breathes cartoonish life into the minor role. The big bad Galactus’s design work fits in a little too neatly with the presentation of Marvel’s cosmic side as seen so far, better than the anonymous cloud of other adaptations but still not popping off the screen like he does on the page (that said, Ineson’s growling voice performance does well to carry the apocalyptic dread). Even Ebon Moss-Bachrach’s performance as The Thing feels a bit too reigned in, even if it conceptually makes sense that Shakman wishes to present his characters as a completely regular family.

Even in the best moments of First Steps, it’s hard to feel hopeful or even positive about the Marvel movies when even their creative successes herald the arrival of more creatively bankrupt money-making exercises: we’re duly reminded that ​“The Fantastic Four will return in Avengers: Doomsday”. You could almost extrapolate Galactus as a stand in for the encroachments of the Marvel Cinematic Universe – aware of what it’s doing and yet constantly caving to its hunger, a force which can only be delayed rather than destroyed. In this case, it’s at least put off until the post credits, the story here standing on its own until it’s time to be called up for Avengers duty.

In isolation, First Steps is a pretty good time, even if it feels as though it could push its aesthetic into more daring territory. This makes that inevitable interference all the more frustrating: when Marvel even shows a glimpse of any kind of visual ambition, we’re told not to expect that from these characters again. Two steps forward, one step back. 

---

'Fantastic Four: First Steps' review: A bit boring, in a refreshing way
The latest entry in the Marvel universe works on its own terms.
Portrait of Adam GrahamAdam Graham
Detroit News Film Critic

In "The Fantastic Four: First Steps," the core Four superheroes are a bit of a bore, and in a way that works to the advantage of this grounded tale of heroism and sacrifice, which is scaled properly for what it is.

It's not a flashy or over-the-top special effects extravaganza, the type we've gotten used to over 36 previous Marvel entries. Rather, it feels intimate in its own way, which is surprising considering its villain is a colossal being who devours planets whole and wants to consume Earth and then move forward on his path of intergalactic destruction.

Marvel's path of intergalactic destruction has slowed since the storytelling high of 2019's "Avengers: Endgame," a peak it will likely never replicate. But "Fantastic Four: First Steps" feels like a palate cleanser, a refreshing reset on the bloat that has come to define the Marvel machine, especially in the years past "Endgame." It's right-sized, with clearly identifiable characters and stakes, and it doesn't feel like a chore or an assignment. It's a self-contained ride, and while it might not reach the level of fantastic, it feels like the right movie for right now.

Back to those heroes: the gang of Four is led by Reed Richards (Pedro Pascal), who goes by Mr. Fantastic, a supergenius scientist who, due to an incident in outer space, can now stretch his body like Silly Putty. "First Steps" is the latest entry in a busy Summer of Pascal, following his roles in "Materialists" and "Eddington," and he's so low-key and dialed down in the role that it's a running joke that people around him are always yawning when he's talking.

In terms of Marvel, where personality is a superpower, he leaves a bit to be desired. Same goes for his three fellow partners, his wife, Sue Storm (Academy Award nominee Vanessa Kirby), who has the ability to make herself invisible; his best friend Ben Grimm ("The Bear's" Ebon Moss-Bachrach, in a mostly motion capture performance), who is made of rocks and possesses super strength; and hot-shot Johnny Storm ("A Quiet Place: Day One's" Joseph Quinn), who can fly and has the ability to set himself ablaze.

All of those abilities came from that same aforementioned space mission, which the film quickly glosses over, like a "Last week, on 'Fantastic Four'"-style recap. Like the new "Superman," the origin story isn't important here, and after two previous film series and 60 years of comics, the filmmakers figure viewers can catch up on those details on their own time, should they feel compelled.

What's more important is the film's world building, and its retro-future kitsch. "First Steps" takes place in a "Jetsons" vision of the future-past, where it's simultaneously 1960 and 2060, where mid-century modern design meets flying cars and friendly service robots. It's this loving production design (credit production designer Kasra Farahani) and the warmth of the world that gives "First Steps" its pizzazz, far more than any of its performances, which are all rendered fairly low register.

About this planet-eating business: Galactus (voiced by the gravelly Ralph Ineson) is a consumer of entire globes, and he's got a hunger for Earth, or rather Earth-828, the slight variation on our world where "First Steps" takes place. The only thing that can stop him is Reed and Sue's newborn baby boy, which he makes a play for: Give him the child and he'll spare life on Earth. But is that a fair trade? To the 6 billion or so people on Earth whose lives hang in the balance, yeah, it would seem so. But Reed and Sue aren't willing to make the deal, so other options of defeating Galactus are explored.

Those other options don't involve a call to other Marvel superheroes, and Spiderman and Thor don't show up to save the day. Rather, "First Steps" is contained to its own world, and Silver Surfer (Julia Garner) acts a bit as the liaison between the two parties, a messenger of Galactus whose liquid metal frame is enticing to the single and ready to mingle Storm.

Also in the mix is Mole Man (Paul Walter Hauser), a subterranean dweller who the Four calls on for help in a time of need. That sense of unity and togetherness informs "First Steps," which favors workable solutions to problems, which are clearly articulated even when they involve galaxy-hopping or black hole-baiting. It's a superhero movie with easy-to-follow motivations and plotting.

Director Matt Shakman ("WandaVision"), working from a script credited to four writers, sets "First Steps" in motion and lets it move at its own pace. It's a nimble, fleet-footed piece of entertainment, which never feels any weightier than a Saturday morning cartoon. In that sense, it feels like a win, or at least the first steps toward a much needed smaller, more manageable world of superhero filmmaking.

---

The Fantastic Four: First Steps makes Superman look mediocre
Marvel launches its new phase with a stylish and satisfying retro-future reboot of The Fantastic Four

Now this is how you do a superhero reboot...

Yes after Superman reboot tripped over itself to face-plant DC into its new era, The Fantastic Four arrives to take it’s first steps and puts Marvel on far surer footing for the future.

It is hard not to compare the two films, not simply because they are the big summer superhero films by the rival companies, but because they are both tasked with starting a new phase of their respective Universe - and because the films are oddly familiar.

While Superman begins three years into him ‘coming out’ to the world, The Fantastic Four is set four years after their ill-fated mission into space, where a cosmic incident caused genius scientist Reed Richards (Pedro Pascal) to become the elasticated Mr Fantastic, his wife Sue Storm (Vanessa Kirby) to become the Invisible Woman (with serious forcefield powers too), her brother Johnny Storm (Joseph Quinn from Stranger Things) to become the Human Torch and Ben Grimm (Ebon Moss-Bachrach, from The Bear) to turn into The Thing.

As with Superman they are already lauded for using their powers to save humans, but unlike in Superman, the film chooses to bring the audience up to speed with a quick recap of the origin story and a whizz through a few of their triumphs to date, defeating supervillains including Mole Man. It does this through satisfying newsreel footage which highlights a key difference in quality between the two films: The Fantastic Four manages to create a convincing and distinctive world for its actions.

It’s not simply a flailing garish mash-up, what we have in F4 is a satisfying retro-future aesthetic set on Earth-828, which is basically a parallel 1960s America (the world into which the comics originally arrived), where the presence of Reed has accelerated technology to the point where there are flying cars and teleportation is possible, though most of the populous still drive chevys and wear hats. This immediately gives the film more literal weight than an unsatisfying reliance on CGI, with Bernie the robot powered by tapes, buttons satisfyingly pushed, vinyl being played and the interior design sleek in that post-War futurism style.

More significantly, is the emotional weight which is rendered here too. Again, Superman was too busy guffawing at its own absurdity to bother with anything emotional - other than a glib insistence that Superman just wants people to get along - but F4 builds its characters, and the dynamics between them, and what they have, and what they could lose.

Storm is pregnant and Reed is under pressure to figure out a new threat from space. A Silver Surfer, Shalla-Bal (Julia Garner) sweeps down to Earth as a herald for a being called Galactus, who is a planet eater; our planet is next on the menu. Cue an exciting trip up into space for the Four to speak to this Galactus, a giant machine-man god of sorts (played by Finchy from The Office, it turns out, Ralph Ineson) with a compulsion to destroy and devour holy bodies with his industrial space ship. When the Four come face to face with him, the being senses something special about Storm and Reed’s unborn baby and says he’ll spare the earth if they give the child to him. The superheroes barely escape back to Earth, and have to figure out what to do, for Galactus is on his way...

All of this is sold in particular by performances from Pascal and Kirby as Reed, which are as good as anything seen in the modern superhero genre. Pascal bringing angst and intensity to his science whizz who feels the burden of having to solve the planet’s problems and is cursed by the knowledge that the best decision may sometimes be at odds with his own wishes. Kirby us revelatory as a mother faced with impossible choices, who possesses a talent for speaking to people and bringing them in to see the world in a different light; as well as a determination to protect at all costs.

There are ethical questions at the heart of the film which elevate it. People on Earth rightly question why they can’t give up one child to save everyone else on Earth. They way Storm eventually resolves this in a speech, is a standout moment as good as any of the Human Torch/Silver Surfer battles/flirts. But again, the difference with Superman here is that the reactions of the citizens feels believable. In Superman, the Metropolis folk stay gawping from their office windows as their city is repeatedly torn apart, and the judgements of Superman are played out as a ‘like’ competition on social media. In Fantastic Four, faced with an outside threat to the planet, people listen, pull together and work to protect themselves and to assist the team.

There is some nostalgia here, for despite the parallel universe idea, it is very much misty-eyed over a time when America was prosperous and largely united post-War, and behave like good wholesome people, rather than Self-addicted trolls and Influencers. But it works as a way to transport us to a different time and place, is effectively rendered and tends to smooth out the action in a satisfying way. It has internal logic, which Superman did not.

It is not perfect. Quinn makes an effective Johnny Storm but not perhaps the James Dean-ish anti-authority pin-up you’d hope. Moss-Bachrach is good under the computer imagery as The Thing, but there’s a lack of exploration of the character’s depressive funk over no longer being human; his burgeoning relationship with Russian Doll’s Natasha Lyonne, is sweet but lacks any kind of acknowledgement that, yknow, he’s made of brick. Galactus is a decent villain, but he’s no Thanos, and is fairly easily dealt with.

---

There have been three cinematic versions of The Fantastic Four, the first family of Marvel Comics. Each had their own flaws: the terrible 1994 Roger Corman version was barely a movie, the 2005 two-film reboot was too by-the-numbers, and Josh Trank’s darker 2015 iteration was damned through behind-the-scenes conflict.

It seems a major miracle that with The Fantastic Four: First Steps we finally get a movie that feels like these cosmic-powered heroes have leapt off the page and onto the screen. The key is that, while this is the first Fantastic Four that’s officially part of the Marvel Cinematic Universe, it’s a parallel universe. This is the perky “adventures in weird science” of the earliest comics. Writer/director Matt Shakman proved his talent with period details with the Disney+ WandaVision, and the New York of his Fantastic Four is one constructed with all the stylish wonders that the midcentury modern futurism and atomic age optimism promised. The core MCU has always contended with technology as a threat, but the New York of this Fantastic Four is one in which the future is now, and the Baxter Building is a shining beacon.

That sense of hope comes from Shakman’s four: Walking rock pile the Thing, Ben Grimm (The Bear’s Moss-Bachrach), as the friendly uncle; the Human Torch, Johnny Storm (Stranger Things’ Quinn), as the rebel with a cause; the Invisible Woman, Sue Richards (Kirby), as the true leader; and Reed Richards (Pascal) as the constant worrier whose true superpower is not his ability to stretch but his overactive big brain. They represent optimism, family, and feel like Jack Kirby’s art come to life. That said, Pascal never captures Reed’s academic detachment even if he brings the essential “hapless dad” energy that has become his signature in The Mandalorian and The Last of Us.

That dad energy is essential since First Steps slams straight into two of the biggest plots from the early history of the Fantastic Four: first, that Sue is pregnant with Franklin, who may or may not be a superpowered baby; and second, that immortal Devourer of Worlds Galactus (Ineson) has come to eat the Earth.

Shakman understands that what makes the Fantastic Four work is that sense of family: They may traverse the stars and beat down subterranean monsters, but they’re never late for Sunday dinner. Seeing Ben walk down Yancy Street or Reed scribbling on a chalkboard creates comic-accurate moments. Yet the story’s told in such an airless fashion that those details seem underserved. It should be a perfect note to have knuckleheaded Johnny help save the world by speaking from the heart to the Silver Surfer (Garner), the Herald of Galactus. After all, Johnny is supposed to be a ladies’ man, but the only women he’s ever seen with are Sue and Future Foundation head honcho Lynne Nichols (Niles), so it becomes a punchline without the setup. The Four’s humanity has always been as powerful as any fireball, and maybe there should have been more time for that.

At a time when everyone is complaining about superhero fatigue, it seems almost perverse to say that maybe the Fantastic Four should have had another film first. Instead, they rush to an ending that bolts them so neatly into the greater continuity. The first hour of First Steps feels less like a story and more like a montage, and Shakman has admitted that at least one character was completely excised after shooting. Rarely has the addition of characters to the MCU felt so much like adding a new component to the machine. The end result is that these four are only allowed to be fine, rather than fantastic, but at least they’re finally here.

---

Fantastic Four: First Steps is a propulsive superhero movie about parenting anxieties

The Fantastic Four are the newest additions to the Marvel Cinematic Universe but they’re also not new-new.

On the one hand, here’s a big, splashy blockbuster that’s stylistically very cool with its 1960s retro-futuristic production design and a line-up of stars that are both famous and talented actors.

Pedro Pascal, Vanessa Kirby and Ebon Moss-Bachrach are award-winning thespians – with real gongs, not Golden Globes or People’s Choice - while Joe Quinn has had an amazing rise since his scene-stealing break-out on Stranger Things three years ago.

Fantastic Four: First Steps has proper emotional stakes and the actors to convincingly pull them off. You will believe that this film with characters who can set themselves on fire or turn invisible is a thoughtful exploration of parenting anxieties.

On the other hand, there have been three other Fantastic Four movies this century, the most recent of which, the 2015 effort starring Miles Teller and Michael B. Jordan, had the distinction of attracting a Rotten Tomatoes score of 9 per cent. Happily, very few people actually saw it. The two 2000s movies were not much better.

So, yes, this new version is a mix of fresh and familiar, drawing from comic book characters that for Marvel, are among the top three teams in the comics, alongside the X-Men and the Avengers, but for casual audiences, it’s something they won’t have seen before.

In the post-pandemic era, Marvel has become synonymous with convoluted narrative universes that feels like homework. Fantastic Four: First Steps is genuinely not that. You do not need to have seen any other Marvel movie or TV show, it does not (yet) connect to them.

There’s even an in-joke in Fantastic Four: First Steps in which Reed Richards is explaining the possibility of parallel universes and upon seeing a classroom of bored faces, stops, and then asks, “Who would like to see an explosion?”.

Explosions you will have while multiverses, at least for now, have been banished to a future movie.

The Fantastic Four characters are Pascal as Reed Richards (he’s stretchy), Kirby as Sue Storm (she turns invisible and can create force shields), Quinn as Johnny Storm (he can control fire and fly) and Moss-Bachrach as Ben Grimm (he’s a big rock dude, obviously super strong).

They were four astronauts whose space mission encountered a cosmic ray which changed their DNA and gave them their powers, which they now use to help people, saving children and defeating bad guys.

At the start of the film, marrieds Sue and Reed discover they’re pregnant, which despite his great joy, also sets off Reed who is worried about every possible danger, from electricity sockets to the effect of their altered genes on their baby.

Not long after, the Silver Surfer (Julia Garner) appears on Earth to herald the imminent arrival of Galactus (Ralph Ineson), a planet-devouring being whose appetite can never be satiated.

As far as threats go, it’s not something that can be fixed with baby gates at the top of the stairs.

Pascal is the big super star of the moment, and he is, indeed, very good in this film as Reed feels the burden of both impending parenthood and the responsibility as Earth’s protector. The character is meant to be the biggest brain in the world, and the frustration of not being able to solve a problem is palpable.

While there have been few superhero parents on screen, having care of a child and of the world, are not that different. You have the best intentions but you control little.

Johnny and Ben also have their own mini-arcs, in addition to their roles in the wider family dynamics, but the film really belongs to Kirby.

We know Kirby is a superstar talent, having firmly established her credentials in The Crown, Pieces of a Woman and as the only performance in Napoleon that made sense. Here, she is brilliant as Sue, who has a quiet emotional strength that rivals her physical prowess.

Sue doesn’t always say exactly what she’s thinking or feeling and she doesn’t need to, it’s all in Kirby’s performance, full of feeling and gravitas.

All four leads also have excellent chemistry as a family unit, and it’s those scenes of domesticity, the moments of tension and love that holds the film together. Even in the action set-pieces, it’s clear what the intention is, what each character’s emotional stakes are in addition to the general world-saving ones.

Director Matt Shakman worked on one of the most creatively successful MCU streaming shows, WandaVision, and he has brought his sensibilities to Fantastic Four: First Steps with its blend of action and character beats – the former is never without the latter, and that’s the mark of a great project.

It’s reminiscent of one of the greatest superhero movies ever made, The Incredibles, which obviously borrowed a lot from the Fantastic Four comics, although it’s not as sharp as that flawless Pixar film.

There are also some dangling threads or supporting characters (Natasha Lyonne and Sarah Niles’s roles, for example) that feels like set-up to something else down the line. But, for the most part, it is a rare standalone entry in the MCU.

Will it be enough to convince sceptics who have wearied of Marvel’s connected stories? For the performances alone, it should. If this Fantastic Four crew is the future of Marvel, it’s looking a lot brighter.

---

‘The Fantastic Four: First Steps’ delivers some delightfully weird sci-fi
Marvel's latest cosmic project takes its cues from Star Trek

After over a decade of writing about superhero movies (and a lifetime of watching them), I realized that what I’m craving most from my caped crusader properties is a sense of newness. Something that surprises me—whether that’s a creative use of powers or a socio-political statement I hadn’t considered before. And the best thing about The Fantastic Four: First Steps is that it has newness in spades; a new tone, a new aesthetic, a weird new story that’s mostly about pregnancy and babies. It’s literally set on a brand-new Earth!

I don’t know if it “resets” the MCU in the way some hoped it would. But I also don’t think it’s trying to. In fact, First Steps often feels less like a superhero story than an oddball standalone sci-fi film. And that’s the most refreshing thing about it.

Captain America: Brave New World misstep aside, this has actually been a pretty decent year for “newness” in superhero storytelling. While Superman didn’t quite work for me, I can appreciate the fresh, colorful optimism a lot of people saw in it. And I’m still kind of blown away by how Thunderbolts* managed to sneak a character-centric exploration of depression and suicidal ideation into a multi-million-dollar comic book movie. Personally, I’d rank First Steps directly in-between them—more cohesive than Superman but not as emotionally affecting as Thunderbolts*, which is still easily my favorite superhero property of the year. (Sorry Daredevil: Born Again.)

For a while, though, I was convinced First Steps might be the greatest superhero project ever made. The movie is never better than during its 20-minute opening prologue, which essentially plays like an extensive “previously on” segment dressed up in the style of a 1960s news piece. This version of Marvel’s “first family” live on Earth 828, a retro-future haven straight out of the Tomorrowland section of Disneyland. It’s a sleek mod utopia filled with all the style of the mid-1960s, but with (as far as we can tell, at least) none of the racism and sexism that defined our Earth’s version of the era. Think The Jetsons mixed with Peyton Reed’s Down With Love with a dash of Bye Bye Birdie—but women can be leaders.

As we swiftly learn, it’s been four years since scientist Reed Richards (Pedro Pascal), his wife Sue Storm (Vanessa Kirby), her brother Johnny Storm (Joseph Quinn), and their best friend Ben Grimm (Ebon Moss-Bachrach) went on a mission to space and came back with powers. Reed can stretch, Sue can turn invisible and create forcefields, Johnny is a flying “human torch,” and Ben is a rock monster with a heart of gold. Much like Superman, First Steps largely “yada yadas” the origin story details and trusts that after two previous live action Fantastic Four series, we get the gist.

The twist here is that this version of the Fantastic Four are full-on global celebrities, although less as traditional superheroes than as ambassadors for science, collaboration, and conflict resolution; like if the Obamas and Bill Nye happened to have superpowers. And director Matt Shakman—who brilliantly brought the sitcom worlds of WandaVision to life—absolutely relishes the chance to bop through their backstory. There are variety show appearances, Human Torch cereal box toys, alt-universe Coppertone ads, to-die-for conversation pit sofas in the Fantastic Four’s Baxter Building penthouse, and vintage magazines with cheeky headlines like “taking the world by Storm,” as we see how Sue has become a professional diplomat who launches a Future Foundation even more peace-minded than the UN.

The movie is never better than when it’s simply introducing its stylish ’60s world. The group’s popularity only grows when Sue announces she’s pregnant, even as her usual first parent anxieties mix with Reed’s concerns about whether the baby of two people with cosmically altered DNA might have unexpected powers of his own. Into that set-up comes the Silver Surfer (Julia Garner), a chromatic outer space being who arrives in Times Square to announce that a giant planet-eating creature called Galactus has marked Earth as its next meal, so everyone should say their goodbyes while they can. Naturally, the people of Earth turn to the Fantastic Four to save the day. And the quartet venture back into space to try to reason with Galactus—or punch him, if that doesn’t work.

I won’t detail where the plot goes from there because I knew very little going in and was consistently surprised by how the story unfolded. Though First Steps loses some cohesion and fun once the story goes cosmic, it also makes some bold, thought-provoking choices I enjoyed mulling over as I watched. In a lot of ways, First Steps is more in conversation with movies like Interstellar and Arrival than Iron Man or Guardians of the Galaxy, even if the introverted reserve of the Reed-Storm-Grimm family stops it from reaching the emotional peaks of those modern sci-fi classics.

Indeed, in place of the chummy comedic energy of the Tim Story Fantastic Four cast (Chris Evans, Jessica Alba, et al.) or the shared youthful trauma of the Josh Trank version (Miles Teller, Michael B. Jordan, etc.), this new cast is united by a certain aloof intellectualism. Sue and Reed are the kind of couple more inclined to talk through their emotions rather than truly feel them. And even when Johnny and Ben crack wise, there’s still a core of astronaut-trained maturity to them. (Here all four are scientists, not just Reed.) Where a lot of superheroes feel like overgrown teens quick to bicker with one another, the characters in First Steps are all decidedly grown-up. And though none of the core four exactly pop as individuals, they complement each other quite nicely as a unit. The actors are consistently charismatic, even when the characters are purposefully mellow.

In fact, where Guardians of the Galaxy took clear inspiration from the colorful chaos of the Star Wars universe, First Steps pulls way more from the Star Trek template. Like the bridge crew of the Enterprise, this version of the Fantastic Four clearly love each other but also maintain just a touch of professional detachment too. (Logic-driven Reed, in particular, comes across almost like a Vulcan.) And like so many Trek stories, First Steps is interested in moral choices, the power of communication, and what it takes to unite people towards a cause greater than themselves. While past Marvel movies have paid lip service to “we don’t trade lives” heroism before, First Steps is the first to put an ethical dilemma (in fact, a literal Trolley Problem!) right at its center.

Again, it’s the newness of it all that intrigued me most. Though First Steps is light on conventional superhero action, it comes up with clever ways for the team to use their physical and mental abilities—from Johnny deploying his flame powers to light up a room during a blackout to a memorable medical moment in zero-gravity. And while the film suffers from some shoddily rendered CGI around one character in particular, it at least delivers some truly impressive visual spectacle for Silver Surfer and especially Galactus, a kaiju with a haunted past.

It all adds up to a movie that’s wilder and weirder than I expected it to be—more think-y and less funny than your average Marvel movie. (Although H.E.R.B.I.E. the robot is a consistent delight.) But also more thought-provoking too, combining the retro sci-fi melancholy of Marvel TV projects like WandaVision and Loki with a certain old-fashioned superhero earnestness; a belief that if we all work together, we can defeat impossible odds. Though there’s a moving story of parenthood at its center, First Steps never quite bursts to emotional life like the best Marvel movies. But it adds an erudite touch to the shared cinematic universe. And that’s a step in an intriguing new direction.

---

‘The Fantastic Four: First Steps’ is a grown-up glow-up for the superhero genre

“The Fantastic Four: First Steps” slots into summer blockbuster season like a square peg in a round popcorn bucket. Prestige TV director Matt Shakman (“WandaVision”) isn’t inclined to pretzel himself like the flexible Reed Richards to please all four quadrants of the multiplex. His staid superhero movie plays like classic sci-fi in which adults wearing sweater vests solemnly brainstorm how to resolve a crisis. Watching it, I felt as snug as being nestled in the backseat of my grandparents’ car at the drive-in.

This reboot of the Fantastic Four franchise — the third in two decades — is lightyears closer to 1951’s “The Day the Earth Stood Still” than it is to the frantic, over-cluttered superhero epics that have come to define modern entertainment. Set on Earth 828, an alternate universe that borrows our own Atomic Age decor, it doesn’t just look old, it moves old. The tone and pace are as sure-footed as globe-gobbling Galactus, this film’s heavy, purposefully marching into alt-world Manhattan. Even its tidy running time is from another epoch. Under two hours? Now that’s vintage chic.

“First Steps” picks up several years after four astronauts — Reed (Pedro Pascal), his wife, Sue (Vanessa Kirby), his brother-in-law Johnny (Joseph Quinn) and his best friend Ben (Ebon Moss-Bachrach) — get themselves blasted by cosmic rays that endow them with special powers. You may know the leads better as, respectively, Mr. Fantastic, the Invisible Woman, the Human Torch and the Thing. For mild comic relief, they also pal around with a robot named H.E.R.B.I.E., voiced by Matthew Wood.

Skipping their origin story keeps things tight while underlining the idea that these are settled-down grown-ups secure in their abilities to lengthen, disappear, ignite and clobber. Fans might argue they should be a bit more neurotic; screenplay structuralists will grumble they have no narrative arc. The mere mortals of Earth 828 respect the squad for their brains and their brawn — they’re celebrities in a genteel pre-paparazzi time — but these citizens are also prone to despair when they aren’t sure Pascal’s workaholic daddy will save them.

Lore has it Stan Lee was a married, middle-aged father aging out of writing comic books when his beloved spouse, Joan, elbowed him to develop characters who felt personal. The graying, slightly boring Reed was a loose-limbed version of himself: the ultimate wife guy with the ultimate wife.

But Hollywood has aged-down Lee’s “quaint quartet,” as he called them, at its own peril. Make the Fantastic Four cool (as the movies have repeatedly tried and failed to do) and they come across as desperately lame. This time, Shakman and the script’s four-person writing team of Josh Friedman, Eric Pearson, Jeff Kaplan and Ian Springer valorize their lameness and restore their dignity. Pascal’s Mr. Fantastic is so buttoned-down that he tucks his tie into his dress shirt.

The scenario is that Sue is readying to give birth to the Richards’ first child just as the herald Shalla-Bal (Julia Garner), a.k.a. the Silver Surfer, barrels into the atmosphere to politely inform humanity that her boss Galactus (voiced by Ralph Ineson) has RSVP-ed yes to her invitation that he devour their planet. In a biologically credible touch, the animators have added tarnish to her cleavage: “I doubt she was naked,” Reed says evenly. “It was probably a stellar polymer.”

Typically, this threat would trigger a madcap fetch-this-gizmo caper (as it did in the original comic). Shakman’s version doesn’t waste its energy or our time on that. Rather, this a lean showdown between self-control and gluttony, between our modest heroes and a greedy titan. It’s at the Venn diagram of a Saturday morning cartoon and a moralistic Greek myth.

The film is all sleek lines, from its themes to its architecture to its images. The visuals by the cinematographer Jess Hall are crisp and impactful: a translucent hand snatching at a womb, a character falling into the pull of a yawning black hole, a torso stretched like chewing gum, a rocket launch that can’t blast off until we get a close-up of everyone buckling their seatbelts. Even in space, the CG isn’t razzle-dazzle busy. Meanwhile, Michael Giacchino’s score soars between bleats of triumph and barbershop-chorus charm, a combination that can sound like an automobile show unveiling the first convertible with tail fins.

There is little brawling and less snark. No one comes off like an aspiring stand-up comic. These characters barely raise their voices and often use their abilities on the mundane: Kirby’s Sue vanishes to avoid awkward conversations, Moss-Bachrach’s Ben, in a nod to his breakout role as the maître d’ on “The Bear,” uses his mighty fists to mash garlic. Johnny, the youngest and most literally hotheaded of the group, is apt to light himself on fire when he can’t be bothered to find a flashlight. He delivers the meanest quip in a respectful movie when he tells Reed, “I take back every single bad thing I’ve been saying about you … to myself, in private.”

Yes, my audience giggled dutifully at the jiggling Jell-O salads and drooled over the groovy conversation pits in the Richards’ living room, the only super lair I’d ever live in. The color palette emphasizes retro shades of blue, green and gold; even the extras have coordinated their outfits to the trim on the Fantasticar. Delightfully, when Moss-Bachrach’s brawny rock monster strolls to the deli to buy black-and-white cookies, he’s wearing a gargantuan pair of penny loafers.

If you want to feel old, the generation of middle schoolers who saw 2008’s “Iron Man” on opening weekend are now beginning to raise their own children. Thirty-seven films later, the Marvel Cinematic Universe has gotten so insecure about its own mission that it’s pitching movies at every maturity level. The recent “Thunderbolts*” is for surly teenagers, “Deadpool & Wolverine” is the drunk, divorced uncle at a BBQ, and “First Steps” extends a sympathetic hand to young families who identify with Reed’s frustration that he can’t childproof the entire galaxy.

Here, for a mass audience, Kirby gets to reprise her underwatched Oscar-nominated turn in “Pieces of a Woman,” in which she extended out a 24-minute, single-take labor scene. This karaoke snippet is good (and even a little operatic when the pain makes her dematerialize). I was as impressed by the costumer Alexandra Byrne’s awareness that even super moms won’t immediately snap back into wearing tight spandex. (By contrast, when Jessica Alba played Sue in 2007’s “Fantastic Four: Rise of the Silver Surfer,” the director notoriously asked her to be “prettier” when she cried.)

This reboot’s boldest stride toward progress is that it values emotionally credible performances. Otherwise, Pascal aside, you wouldn’t assemble this cast for any audience besides critics and dweebs (myself included) who keep a running list of their favorite not-quite-brand-name talents who are ready to break through to the next level of their career while yelling, “It’s clobbering time!”

Still, this isn’t anyone’s best role, and it’s a great movie only when compared to similarly budgeted dreck. Yet it’s a worthy exercise in creating something that doesn’t feel nostalgic for an era — it feels of an era. Even if the MCU’s take on slow cinema doesn’t sell tickets in our era, I admire the confidence of a movie that sets its own course instead of chasing the common wisdom that audiences want 2½ hours of chaos. Studio executives continuing to insist on that nonsense deserve Marvel’s first family to give them a disappointed talking-to, and send them to back their boardrooms without supper.
